Good morning.
Welcome to Mastering
Grand Central Dispatch.
My name is Daniel Steffen.
I'm the engineer responsible
for GCD on the CoreOS team.
And as you know,
we've introduced Grand Central Dispatch
in Mac OS X Snow Leopard and
were pleased to bring it to iOS
4 last year here at the conference.
It has been very widely adopted in both
your apps and in Apple's frameworks.
And indeed, as you may have seen in
other sessions this week,
we are introducing a large number
of new APIs in line and iOS 5 that
coordinate or relate to GCD in some way.
So it's becoming an ever more important
core technology for you to understand
if you do any kind of asynchronous or
concurrent programming on our platform.
It's worth pointing out that
the GCD API is identical
across our platforms,
so you can use the same functionality
on both Mac OS X and iOS.
And it will,
GCD will scale across our hardware
from a single core iPhone all
the way up to a 24 core Mac Pro.
So today we're going to give a
very brief introduction to GCD.
There was a more in-depth introductory
session yesterday that I hope you managed
to catch if you're new to the technology.
And we'll look at what is new in
GCD on Mac OS X line and iOS 5 and
give some advanced usage of GCD API.
So what is GCD?
So the very core of
GCD are blocks and queues.
Why blocks?
These are very useful in asynchronous
programming to encapsulate units of work.
Along with the associated state,
so in this example here,
we create a block and it encapsulates
some piece of work that we want
to do asynchronously and the
block captures the state that
it needs from the surrounding stack.
Along with the associated state,
so in this example here,
we create a block and it encapsulates
some piece of work that we want
to do asynchronously and the
block captures the state that
it needs from the surrounding stack.
For instance, here,
it will retain the object and
copy the integer argument.
So once that is done,
we pass that block to a function that
will execute the block asynchronously
and now we can safely change the integer
or even release the Objective-C object
without affecting the block.
Along with the associated state,
so in this example here,
we create a block and it encapsulates
some piece of work that we want
to do asynchronously and the
block captures the state that
it needs from the surrounding stack.
For instance, here,
it will retain the object and
copy the integer argument.
So once that is done,
we pass that block to a function that
will execute the block asynchronously
and now we can safely change the integer
or even release the Objective-C object
without affecting the block.
Queues are the central concept in GCD.
They are just a very
lightweight list of blocks,
really, and it is very cheap to create
queues so it's fine to have
many queues in your application.
The enqueue and dequeue
operations of our queues are FIFO.
So, blocks get dequeued and executed in
the order that they were enqueued.
And importantly,
the enqueue operation itself is atomic.
So, it is safe for multiple
threads to enqueue onto a
single queue at the same time.
These properties,
along with the fact that serial
queues execute blocks one at a time,
make these queues useful for
synchronization and serialization
purposes in your application.
We also provide concurrent queues.
These execute multiple
blocks at the same time.
There's still dequeue blocks in order,
but they will,
because they can execute concurrently,
and these blocks may then
complete out of order.
Another way to get concurrency with
GCD is to use multiple serial queues.
That works because all of our
queues execute concurrently
with respect to other queues.
So, this is an example of that in action.
Here we have two serial queues
with some blocks enqueued.
And we have a worker thread on
one CPU that starts to dequeue
some blocks and execute them.
If a second worker thread can come along,
it can dequeue from the other queue,
and as you can see,
we have some concurrency where
there was overlap between blocks.
Similarly, with a concurrent queue,
here we have two worker threads that
dequeue items from the one concurrent
queue and execute them concurrently.
Very briefly,
the API to submit blocks to queues
is DispatchAsync and DispatchSync.
DispatchAsync just enqueues
a block and goes along,
whereas DispatchSync will enqueue
the block and wait until that block
is actually executed on the queue.
You can also delay the
submission of blocks to a queue.
You can also delay the submission
of blocks to a queue by
calling the DispatchAfter API,
or concurrently submit and execute
a single block many times to a queue
by calling the DispatchApply API.
We also allow you to suspend and resume
execution of a dispatch queue by calling
the Dispatch Suspend and Resume APIs.
This is an asynchronous
operation suspension.
It will take effect at the earliest
possible opportunity on a queue,
meaning it won't interrupt any ongoing
blocks that are already executing,
but as soon as the can't
block is finished executing,
the queue will stop execution.
If you want to make this
process deterministic,
the way to do that is to call dispatch
suspend from a block that is actually
executing on the queue itself.
This way you know that you can't block
is the last one that will execute
before suspension takes effect.
And our queues are reference counted
and you maintain that reference count
with dispatch retain and release.
A couple of pitfalls to go
over with dispatch queues.
They are really intended for flow
control in your application and not
as a general purpose data structure.
If you have a lot of work that
you may need to execute in your
application asynchronously,
it is better to keep that work in an
actual data structure until you're sure
that you really have to execute the
work and only then submit it to a queue.
In particular, this is the case.
Because once you submit
a block to a queue,
there is no way to cancel that.
The block, we guarantee that that
block will execute.
Also,
as with any multithreaded programming,
be very careful when you
use any synchronous API.
GCD does not protect you from
the possibility of deadlock.
For instance,
if you have used our dispatch sync API,
it is very possible that you can
deadlock yourself by waiting for
a queue that is waiting on the
queue that you're on in turn.
Also, if you use our recommended
pattern to apply,
or use a serial queue for each subsystem
in your application or each resource
that you need to -- each shared
resource that you need to protect,
if you block the queue that protects
that resource or that subsystem,
you will block the whole
application's access to that.
So any kind of synchronous
API on those queues would be bad.
We have a couple of queue types.
The global queues that you get with
the dispatch get global queue API,
is passing in a priority.
These are concurrent queues.
They execute multiple
blocks at the same time.
And they are global across
your whole application.
The main queue is another global object.
This is a serial queue that
cooperates with the main run
loop of your application.
This is typically where you
would execute blocks that
interact with the UI subsystem.
This is one of the queues where
it is very important to not run
any blocking synchronous API,
of course,
because you would prevent event
processing in the app if you do that.
Serial queues you can create yourself
by calling the Dispatch Queue
Create API and passing in a label.
New in Lion and iOS 5
are concurrent queues.
Like the serial queues,
you create these with the Dispatch
Queue Create API and you pass in the
Dispatch Queue concurrent parameter.
These, like the global concurrent queues,
will execute multiple
blocks at the same time,
but they can be suspended
like a serial queue.
And a new concept,
they support barrier blocks.
What are barrier blocks?
These are blocks that represent
synchronization points in an
otherwise concurrent queue.
So they will not run until all the
blocks that were submitted before
the barrier block have completed.
And while they're executing,
nothing else can run on the queue.
Any blocks that were submitted
later will wait until that
barrier block has executed.
You submit barrier blocks by
calling the Dispatch Barrier Async
or Dispatch Barrier Sync APIs.
These are exactly like Dispatch
Async and Dispatch Sync,
except that they mark the
block as a barrier block.
Note that these barrier blocks don't
do anything special on the global
concurrent queues because the global
concurrent queues are a shared
resource across the whole application.
We don't want anybody to be
able to monopolize those queues.
So here we have the same
animation as before,
except that we have one
of these concurrent,
one of these barrier blocks in
the middle of one of these new
concurrent queues submitted by
the Dispatch Barrier Async API.
And once threads start
dequeuing blocks here,
the yellow barrier block will not
start executing until all the existing
work on the queue has finished.
Then while the block,
the barrier block is executing,
nothing else can run.
And once it has finished,
normal concurrent execution can continue.
One important use case for these new
concurrent queues are to implement
efficient read or write schemes with GCD.
[Transcript missing]
So we currently have
three priority levels,
low, default, and high.
And if you create a serial queue,
by default,
it will come with the default priority
global queue set as its target queue.
Then you can submit some back
to that queue and later on
potentially change its target queue,
say, to the low priority queue.
Of course, you can also,
when you create a queue,
immediately change the target queue here.
You set it to be the high priority queue.
So items that you submit to the serial
queue on the right will now execute on
a thread that runs at high priority.
New in iOS 5 and line,
we're adding a fourth priority level,
the background priority.
And of course,
with the new concurrent queues,
you can also set the target queue.
So here we've set it to be this new
background priority global queue.
More on that.
The background priority global queue
you get by passing the dispatch
queue priority background constant
to dispatch get global queue.
Blocks that you submit to this
queue will run on threads that run
at the lowest possible scheduling
priority in your process.
And any I.O.
that you do from that thread
will be throttled I.O.
system-wide that will take a
backseat to any normal I.O.
that's ongoing.
So this queue is very useful if you
have any kind of idle time work or
scanning of the disk or indexing,
anything like that that should
not interfere with other more
higher priority work on the system.
As mentioned,
target queues can form a whole hierarchy.
And the way to set that up is by
calling dispatch set target queue.
This in itself is an asynchronous
barrier operation on the queue.
So any work that is already
enqueued on the queue and
executing will not be affected
by this changing of target queue.
It's only once all the work that
was submitted ahead of the call
to dispatch set target queue has
finished that the target queue will
change and affect any future blocks.
And we support arbitrary deep
hierarchies if that is useful to you,
but not loops.
There's a couple of useful somewhat
non-trivial idioms with target queues
that we'd like to go through now.
One is that you can synchronize with a
serial queue by setting the target queue
of your queue to be that serial queue.
Synchronize meaning that there
will be a block executing either on
your queue or on the serial queue
but not on both at the same time.
However, setting that up does not
implicitly order -- impose any
ordering between the two queues.
So if you submit blocks to
both queues in a certain order,
that doesn't mean that they
will be dequeued in that order.
Here we have two zero queues that come in
the default state with the target queue
set to the default priority global queue.
You can synchronize them by
changing the target queue of
one to be the other zero queue.
This means there will be a block
executing on one or the other
of these two zero queues but
not on both at the same time.
Of course, you can do the same with one
of our new concurrent queues,
and what that does is that it actually
makes the concurrent queue serial.
The reason for that is that,
remember I said,
target queues are where the dequeue
operation for a queue is executed.
And because here the target queue
of a concurrent queue is serial,
the dequeue operation becomes serialized,
so we cannot run more than
one block at the same time,
even though the queue was concurrent.
One use case for that is if you
can't use a read or write lock,
you can promote it to an
exclusive lock by doing this.
[Transcript missing]
As soon as that red high
priority item has finished,
we resume the low priority queue and
the DQ operation can continue as normal.
So now we've managed to
jump ahead of the queue.
Our next topic is queue-specific data.
This is a new feature in iOS 5 and Lion.
This allows you to associate arbitrary
key-value storage to a queue.
We already had DispatchSetContext
and GetContext,
but that was a single pointer and
wasn't really sufficient if you were
sharing your queues among multiple
subsystems in your application.
So here we allow you
with the DispatchQueue,
GetSpecific and DispatchQueueSetSpecific
APIs to set key-value
storage for any queue.
And we use keys that we
just compare as pointers.
So typically,
we recommend that you use the
address of a static variable in
your subsystem that will be a
unique pointer to your subsystem.
Don't just pass in a string because
that may not be a unique pointer.
And for the setters,
you pass in a value and
a destructor function.
That destructor function is called
when the value is unset by another
call to dispatch queue set specific
or when the queue is destroyed.
And a new capability we make available
for you with this is that you can get
the current value for a given key when
you're running in a block on a queue
with the dispatch get specific API.
You just pass in the key and this
will return the value that is set
on the currently executing queue or,
importantly,
this is the value that is set on
the currently executing queue.
Daniel Steffen: And this is a way of the
target queue hierarchy.
If this current queue
doesn't have a value set,
it will go and look in the target queue,
does this have the
value set for this key,
and so on until it reaches
the bottom of the hierarchy.
So to illustrate this here,
we have three queues set up in
a target queue relationship,
and we set a value for a key,
value one set on the
QA and value two set on QB,
but no value for this key set on QC.
If you now run a block on QB and
call dispatch get specific there,
you will see value two.
But if you run it on QC,
because it doesn't have its own value,
it will see the value
from the target queue,
value one.
Another new API set that
we are introducing in iOS 5
and line is dispatch data.
This is a facility that provides
container objects to you for multiple
discontinuous memory buffers.
And importantly, these container objects,
as well as the represented buffers,
must be immutable.
So the container objects,
once you've created them,
you can no longer change them,
and any buffers that you pass to us to
be represented by dispatch data must not
be changed once you've given them to us.
And the central goal of the
whole API set is to avoid copying
buffers as much as possible.
The way you create one of
these Dispatch Data objects is
to call Dispatch Data Create.
You pass in a buffer and a size
and it will return you a Dispatch
Data T object that you manage
with Dispatch Retain Release like
all the other Dispatch objects.
So we represent that
graphically here with a
Blue memory buffer represented
by a red Dispatch data object.
And because the buffers are
required to be immutable,
we can now have multiple Dispatch data
objects that reference the same buffer.
And of course,
only once all the data objects go
away will the buffer be deallocated.
The way that deallocation happens
is via this destructor block
that you give us as the last
parameter in Dispatch Data Create.
And there's a couple
possibilities for that.
You can pass the Dispatch
Data Destructor default constant.
This will tell us you should
make a snapshot of this data.
I can't really guarantee that
this buffer will not change for
the lifetime of the data object.
So we make a copy and then manage
the lifetime of that copy ourselves.
So of course, if you can avoid it,
this is not the preferred choice
because it involves making a copy.
If you just have a buffer
allocated in malloc,
you pass Dispatch Data Destructor free,
which is essentially equivalent
to giving us a block that
we'll call free on the buffer,
but is more efficient.
And if you have some custom buffer that
is maybe wrapped into another object,
it just passes a block that then does
whatever deallocation break is required.
So in this example, for instance,
we've passed in the buffer underlying
a CFData object to the creation.
And for the destructor,
we just release the CFData.
You can also create Dispatch
Data objects from other objects,
from other data objects.
For instance, via concatenation with the
Dispatch Data Create concat API.
This takes two existing data objects
and makes a new object from them
that now represents the two memory
buffers concatenated together.
And of course, again,
because of counting of references,
when these original
source objects go away,
the memory buffers will stick
around until they're gone.
So the concatenated
object also goes away.
You can also make a subrange
of an existing data object if
you're only interested in a
part of the data by calling the
Dispatch Data Create subrange API.
So here, as an example,
we have a data object that represents
four discontinuous memory buffers.
And we're really only interested in the
piece between the two light blue arrows.
So we call the Dispatch
Data Create subrange
API with this range here,
which makes a new object
that only represents... which
represents those two pieces.
And if you now get rid of
the source data object,
you can deallocate the two buffers
that are no longer required.
So if you do any kind of incremental
processing of data in your application,
this can be a very easy way to get
rid of data on an ongoing basis.
And again, of course,
when that goes away,
the remaining buffers get deallocated.
[Transcript missing]
Let's look at an example
of this in action.
Here we acquire a dispatch data object
from somewhere and what we're interested
in is to try and find the header
on a character by character basis.
We want to look through the
data and find the terminator
character of a header here,
which we picked control Z as an
example to be the terminator.
We need to fill in this position under
under block variable with the position
of that character in the buffer.
So we call dispatch data apply
and our iterator block will
get past four parameters,
a region object, which we don't actually
use in this example,
but that just is an object that
represents the current memory
area that's being traversed,
and an offset,
which indicates where that area
starts in the overall data object,
and a buffer and the size
that gives you direct data.
So we can then create
access to the storage.
So here we just look for the position
of that terminator character.
If we find it,
we calculate the overall position
in the buffer and we return a
Boolean that indicates whether
the iteration should continue.
So for instance here,
once we have found the header,
there's no need to go through all the
rest of the buffers in the object so we
can return false and stop the iteration.
[Transcript missing]
and also allow us to track
file descriptor ownership with
a reference countered object.
And these dispatch IO channels
have two different types,
stream or random that you have to
specify a channel creation time
with the following two constants.
The stream access channels
perform IO operations at the
file pointer position and advance
the file pointer position.
And if there's multiple asynchronous
IO operations in flight,
these will be performed serially
one after the other because they
depend on the file pointer position.
Of course,
if you give us a file descriptor
like a socket where reads can be
performed concurrently with writes
without interfering with each other,
we will do that.
The random access channels on the other
hand will start at a specified offset.
The IO operations on those channels
will start at a specified offset to
the initial file pointer position
when you created the channel.
And these operations then change
the file pointer position.
So this is like period versus read,
right?
And in this case,
any asynchronous IO operations
that you submit may be performed
concurrently if it makes sense
for the device in question.
And of course,
any file descriptors that you give us for
these kinds of channels must be seekable.
So three ways to create
Dispatch.io channels.
The Dispatch.io create API where
you pass in a file descriptor.
The Dispatch.io create with pass
API where you pass in a path on disk.
And the Dispatch.io create
with IO API where you pass
in an existing IO channel.
This is useful if you
need to change the type,
for instance,
of a channel or change configuration
parameters on a channel
without affecting the original.
And all of these take a cleanup
block as the last parameter.
So let's look at that.
This cleanup block is what
allows us to do that wrapping
and control of file descriptors.
When you give us a file descriptor
with the Dispatch.io create API,
it becomes under system control.
And you must not change
it during that time.
So you must not do any direct
IO to it or change the file pointer
position or close it or change
any configuration parameters on it.
And you must not do these things
until that cleanup handler is called.
That cleanup handler gets called
when the IO operations that you have
submitted to the channel have all
completed and either the channel has been
released or it has been closed with an
API that we'll see in a couple of slides.
The syntax of these cleanup
handles is very simple.
We just pass in an error.
These errors are only creation
errors for the channel.
So we only pass you errors that occur
when we try to create a channel,
for instance,
if you pass a bad file descriptor
or one of the wrong type or a
pass to a to a volume that doesn't
exist or anything like that.
You won't get any I/O errors
on the channel that occur later
on when you submit operations.
And the typical thing that you
will do in this cleanup handler
is close the file descriptor.
Again, you must not do that before
this point because it would
rip it out from under us.
The I/O operations that we support,
asynchronous reads and
asynchronous writes.
You submit an asynchronous read
request at the file pointer or
at the specified object offsets,
depending on the channel type
with the dispatch I/O read API.
And here you just give us the
lengths that you would like
to read from that channel.
And asynchronous write, you pass in,
again,
occurs at the file pointer position
or at the specified offset,
and you just pass in the dispatch
data object that you would
like to write to the channel.
Both of these take a handler block,
which is an I/O handler.
This is what allows you to
do incremental processing.
We will call this block multiple times,
potentially, during the I/C.
This is an asynchronous I/O operation
and give you incremental
pieces of data as they come in.
So importantly, that data that comes in,
we will get rid of it as
soon as the handler returns.
So if you can do any ongoing processing,
that's great.
Otherwise,
you must retain that data if you need
it after the handler has returned.
So just call dispatch retain on it or
concatenate it with another object,
a dispatch data object, et cetera.
And the read operations are
passed the data in one of these
handlers that was read since the
last time the handler was called,
whereas the write operations actually
pass the data that we couldn't write yet.
So this is the end piece of the data,
which will get smaller
as the write proceeds.
And this is particularly
useful if the write fails,
then you can get at the data
that we couldn't write and
maybe write it somewhere else,
a retry or something like that.
The syntax of these handlers is,
we pass you three parameters, boolean,
done flag, a dispatch data object,
and an error, parameter.
And so you should treat all of
these three parameters independently
and check for their presence.
If there is a data object,
that means maybe there
was some data read,
you process it and handle
any error that occurred.
And once you get the done flag,
that indicates to you that this is the
last time it will call this handler.
So complete any processing of
incremental data or any state that
you've accumulated during that time.
The other kind of operation we support
on dispatch area channels are barriers.
These are very similar to the,
barrier blocks that we discussed
earlier for concurrent queues.
They only execute once any pending
I/O operations that you already
submitted to the channel have completed.
So this is a way to allow you to
synchronize I/O operations on the
channel and know when they have finished.
And while one of these
barrier blocks is ongoing,
it has exclusive access to the file
descriptor underlying the channel.
So we do actually allow
non-destructive modifications of the
file descriptor during this time.
So here we submit one of these barrier
blocks with the dispatch I/O barrier API.
And inside this block,
now we are sure when we're
executing that we have exclusive
access to the file descriptor.
So if you don't know it, for instance,
if you open the channel from the path,
from a path, we will open the file
descriptor on your behalf.
So you don't have it,
you call the dispatch I/O get
descriptor API to get it.
And in this example, we just call fsync,
for instance.
So if you have a bunch of asynchronous
writes that you have submitted,
you want to make sure
that they're synced.
So you put in a barrier block
that will make sure they have
all completed and now sync.
I mentioned closing channels before.
You do that with the
dispatch I/O close API.
This will close the channel from
accepting any new operations,
but it will let any existing already
submitted operations complete.
Once they have all completed,
it will invoke that cleanup handler
where you can close the file descriptor.
If you need to interrupt any already
submitted existing operations,
you can pass in the dispatch
I/O stop flag and we will attempt
to interrupt any ongoing I/O at
the earliest possible opportunity.
But of course, this is asynchronous.
So again,
you must wait for the cleanup handler
to be called to be sure that all the
operations have actually completed.
Any ongoing I/O handlers that are
interrupted get passed the eCancel
error flag set that they know that
they were interrupted by a stop.
To go through an example
of all this tied together,
we are implementing a
transliteration of maybe a very,
very large file that we pass
in via a file descriptor,
and we want to transliterate that
file on a character-by-character
basis and write it out to a path,
and want to do it all asynchronously.
So we create an input channel.
In this example,
we make it a random channel
from this file descriptor,
and as you can see,
the cleanup handler here just handles any
creation errors and then closes the file
descriptor behind us when the operations
are done on this input channel.
The output channel we create from a path,
and importantly for this example,
we make that a stream type,
and we put in the parameters that
we would have otherwise passed to
open to create the file for writing.
And the cleanup handler here
just handles any errors.
It doesn't need to close any file
descriptors because we do that on your
behalf when we open from the path.
Once you have that all set up,
you can put in an asynchronous read
operation to the input channel,
and here we pass in offset
zero and length size max,
which will actually read
the whole file on disk.
So it could be 200 megabyte
file or something like that.
And we have the handler block here,
which gets passed those done
data and error parameters.
And remember, this gets called
potentially multiple times.
So each time we check,
do we have a data object?
If there is one,
we call this translate function
that I haven't shown here,
which will go through and create a new
data object with the result of this
transformation that we want to do.
And create a new data object
that returns to us that we now
pass to an asynchronous write.
So this is where it becomes
important that the output channel
was a stream channel because,
of course, we could have multiple of
these asynchronous writes.
And we just pass the output data piece at
offset zero to be written to the channel.
And we, in this instance,
in the IO handler,
we don't do anything special.
We just handle any errors.
We don't try to write any data
if it couldn't retry writing
any data or anything like that.
And once we have passed the output
data object to dispatcher write,
the system will retain that object so
we can get rid of it here immediately.
And the same with the input data object.
We didn't, as remember, as I mentioned,
this data object gets
released immediately as soon
as the read handler returns.
And so here,
if you have a very large file,
we will get pieces of that
file one after the other,
and we will actually never
have all the file in memory.
As soon as any processing and
writing of that piece is done,
we can get rid of it here immediately.
And so once the read handler is done,
the memory will be released,
and you will have very good
memory efficiency with this API.
When you pass the done
flag in the read handler,
you know that the read
request has completed,
so we know that we never need
the output channel anymore,
so now we can just release it.
And the same with the input channel,
once we have submitted the read request,
the system will retain the input channel
for the lifetime of that request,
so we can immediately
get rid of that channel.
So now at the end here,
we have released all our
references to all the objects,
and as soon as the asynchronous
IO completes all the references,
all the objects will take care
of themselves and release.
So to summarize, we went over a couple of
advanced examples of usage of
the target queue API in GCD,
then looked at
The new APIs that we are
introducing in iOS 5 and Lion,
concurrent queues and barrier blocks,
which are useful in particular for
implementing read-or-writer schemes,
queue-specific data,
which allows you to associate arbitrary
key-value storage to a dispatch queue,
dispatch data API for managing
this contiguous memory buffers,
and the dispatch
IO API for asynchronous IO.
For more information,
you can contact Michael Churowicz,
our DevTools and Performance Evangelist.
And we have a concurrency programming
guide on the DevTools website,
which is very informative and
covers many of these APIs.
And of course,
LibDispatch itself is open source.
We will very soon merge in the source
changes for the new APIs that we are
introducing into that repository.
So if you want to go and have
a look at the implementation,
you can do that.
And of course,
there's a special forum for
GCD questions on the developer forum,
so we encourage you to
ask any questions there.
Related sessions happened
all yesterday already,
unfortunately, so if you haven't had a
chance to go to those,
please watch them on video.
And I've also put the references
to the GCD sessions from last year
on here that's focused specifically
on iOS programming with GCD.
Thank you.